Title: The Spin-MInt Algorithm: an Accurate and Symplectic Propagator for the Spin-Mapping Representation of Nonadiabatic Dynamics
Authors: Lauren E. Cook, James R. Rampton, Timothy J. H. Hele
Date: 2025-12-01
ArXiv ID: 2512.01579v1

The Spin-MInt Algorithm: an Accurate and Symplectic Propagator for the Spin-Mapping Representation of Nonadiabatic Dynamics

Mapping methods, including the Meyer-Miller-Stock-Thoss (MMST) mapping and spin-mapping, are commonly utilised to simulate nonadiabatic dynamics by propagating classical mapping variable trajectories. Recent work confirmed the Momentum Integral (MInt) algorithm is the only known symplectic algorithm for the MMST Hamiltonian. To our knowledge, no symplectic algorithm has been published for the spin-mapping representation without converting to MMST variables and utilising the MInt algorithm. Here, we present the Spin-MInt algorithm which directly propagates the spin-mapping variables. First, we consider a two-level system which maps onto a spin-vector on a Bloch sphere and determine that the Spin-MInt is a symplectic, symmetrical, second-order, time-reversible, angle invariant and geometric structure preserving algorithm. Despite spin-variables resulting in a non-invertible structure matrix, we rigorously prove the Spin-MInt is symplectic using a canonical variable transformation. Computationally, we find that the Spin-MInt and MInt algorithms are symplectic, satisfy Liouville's theorem, provide second-order energy conservation and are more accurate than a previously-published angle-based algorithm. The Spin-MInt is significantly faster than the MInt algorithm for two electronic states. Secondly, we extend this methodology to more than two electronic states and present accurate population results for a three-state morse potential. We believe this to be the first known symplectic algorithm for propagating the nonadiabatic spin-mapping Hamiltonian and one of the first rigorously symplectic algorithms in the case of non-trivial coupling between canonical and spin systems. These results should guide and improve future simulations.
